---
layout: default
---

# Research

## Social and acoustic factors in the perception of creak

Several production studies have recently linked women in the United States to the usage of “creak,” or “vocal fry” (Yuasa, 2010; Podesva 2011; Wolk et al 2011; Anderson and Nguyen 2004; Mendoza-Denton 2011). Perception studies about creak have been rarer and have generally focused on the personality traits associated with creak (Yuasa 2010, Anderson et al. 2014). Although these studies have found that listeners associate creak with women and femininity, few aim to tease apart the salience of creak in women’s speech as a result of acoustic realities versus social associations. This study aims to determine whether listeners a) detect creak more easily in women’s voices and b) if so, whether this salience is due in part to the greater expectation of creak due to the perceived association of creak with women, as opposed to the ease of detecting creak in voices with higher fundamental frequency. 

This study seeks to answer those questions by pairing pitch-altered gender-ambiguous voices, unaltered male voices, and unaltered female voices with photos of faces intended to prime listeners to perceive the speakers as male or female. In a previous perception study, listeners judged the pitch-altered stimuli to be gender-ambiguous. Listeners were required to correctly identify creak or lack thereof in eight of twelve unambiguous, natural examples (without visual stimuli) from sociolinguistic interviews in a brief training task before proceeding with the experiment. They were then asked to determine whether an utterance contained creak in the experiment stimuli. All audio stimuli were produced by six different speakers reading phrases in which naturally occurring creak was observed in previously collected spontaneous speech. The gender-ambiguous voices were split between male and female photos, whereas the normative male and normative female voices were presented with male photos and female photos respectively. I hypothesized that if speakers have a faster reaction time and  higher accuracy (or a lower accuracy but a stronger expectation of creak) for stimuli with female photos in the gender ambiguous voices than the same audio stimuli with male photos, this indicates a social dimension in the perception of creak. Differences between gender-normative speakers could be due to social or acoustic considerations.

The results of this study indicated that there is a difference in the gender-ambiguous stimuli: listeners were more likely to correctly identify creak when the accompanying photo stimulus was a woman’s face. There is also a significant difference in the gender-ambiguous condition between the male photo condition and the female photo condition in reaction time; reaction time is quicker for the stimuli with female photos. However, listeners had an easier time identifying creak in unaltered female voices than in unaltered male voices, likely due in part to acoustic salience for creak in the speech of women versus the speech of men. 

These results indicate that gender judgment is affecting how quickly listeners hear creak. When primed to expect a female voice, listeners respond more quickly and are more likely to respond that the speaker uses creak, even when there is none. 


## Creating gender-neutral stimuli

Studies of perception in gender are considerably more rare than production studies, and I contend that one of the reasons for this is that acoustically altering audio stimuli for the purpose of testing certain linguistic aspects of gender is quite difficult. Any aspect of the performance of gender is complex and multi-layered, but perhaps none more so than language. In this project, I make an effort to create perceptually gender-neutral stimuli for the purpose of running perception experiments about gender. At this time, testing the stimuli themselves for whether participants think of them as gender-neutral is the most feasible way of creating such stimuli. I chose tall women to record raw stimuli, because they have longer vocal tracts than women of equivalent size and are therefore more likely to approximate some of the acoustic correlates of men’s voices, especially formant frequencies. I then altered the f0 of the raw stimuli to become more gender-ambiguous, and I tested participants to see whether they thought of these speakers as “male” or “female.” Roughly two-thirds of the stimuli were judged as female, while one-third were judged as male. The stimuli created by this study could be used as convincing gender-neutral stimuli in order to study other acoustic correlates of gender perception, especially when listeners are influenced by the use of visual stimuli (i.e. pictures of faces).


## Gender and formality effects on the production of vocal fry

According to almost all of the recent literature on the subject of “vocal fry” (“creaky voice” in the parlance of most linguists), women are reported to use the feature more than their male counterparts (Podesva 2011, Yuasa 2010, Mendoza-Denton 2011, Anderson and Nguyen 2004, Wolk et al 2012).  Most of these studies examined the feature in the context of an informal sociolinguistic interview; none compared formal contexts to informal contexts, although some linguists have discussed women using vocal fry frequently in formal contexts such as news broadcasting (Yuasa 2010).  The current study examines vocal fry as it relates to both gender and formality to determine whether women use vocal fry more often than men, and to determine whether the type of speaking task played a role in the usage of vocal fry, as determined by a five-minute portion of an informal sociolinguistic interview and a formal reading task using the “Rainbow Passage,” with 16 college-aged participants from the state of Michigan. It was found that overall, there was no significant difference between men and women in their usage of vocal fry. In the informal interview, unlike previous research, it was found that there was no significant difference between women and men. In addition, there was no difference between the overall amount of vocal fry used between the tasks. However, there was a difference between men and women in the reading task, with men using vocal fry less often than women. And although there was no overall difference between the tasks for the amount of vocal fry used, there was a significant difference in the environments where vocal fry occurred, with the vocal fry in the reading task generally occurring on the phrase-final syllable, and the distribution of the interview being more even. It appears that the use of vocal fry is balancing out between men and women in informal contexts, but that women continue to lead usage in formal contexts. 

